---
layout: post
title: "DT-20"
date: 2021-02-02 18:00:00 +0200
categories: audio programming
author: Henrik Sveen, Anders Lidel, Pedro Lucas, Stephen Gardener
image: /assets/image/
keywords: csound, python, tape, granular, reverb
excerpt: "INSERT TEXT"
---
#### The Idea
The initial idea was to have a looper keeping track of each loop as a new layer, so it could be possible to browse your way through the history of the loop by muting and unmuting layers on the fly. In addition the idea included slicing of the chosen layer. Slicing based on some MIR in the style of the Scientific Computing exam from 2020. The reason would be that the looper then could «listen» to the loop layer and, based on what you played, reorganize the audio in slices giving you, the user, a new musical suggestion.
After discussing ideas as a team, and after a week of work, we figured that we would have to aim for a slightly different approach to actually get the instrument working in time. After the first week we had the basic looper function plus nearly done effects to put in. What we wanted to implement was a way to send the loops into the effects and then feedback the effects back into the loop recorder so that it would gradually get more and more effected. An interesting looper approach seen in Mood by Chase Bliss Audio. We figured the best thing would be to simply start by including the effects as FX-return channels receiving send audio from the loops. A simple start. After some thinking it all worked, and we started playing around with the looper and figured this simple functionality was quite good. Considering the time we had left it felt like a better idea to focus on getting this idea to work properly rather than stepping away from it and maybe end up somewhere not so inspiring. So we did.

#### The DT-20
The result is the DT-20, a 4-track style looper taking inspiration from tape looping in a digital manner. The recording and playback is driven by a «digital motor» which can be controlled by pitch and with wow and flutter. It’s a digital tape degrading audio in a digital way. To avoid sample drops and copies when recording the motor records 44100 samples/sec at double speed, meaning that when driving it at «normal speed» it records 22050 samples /sec. Calling it «normal speed» as you can decide yourself where 1:1 playback speed is by adjusting the speed parameter before starting the first recording. At lowest speed, half time, the sample rate is 10025. And then there is all the in-between values where the digital tape really shines with recorded sample degradation happening, adding charm and love to the recordings. The instrument has a stereo mixer/preamp (with overdrive on high volumes) with FX on sends. The effects will be described in separate parts of this post.
The interface has a «semi hardware» approach. Since the instrument is based on old school lo-fi approach towards recording and music making, we felt that this should be reflected in the interface. So everything is computer keyboard controlled inspired by ***Commadore 64*** way of controlling the computer. We used the ascii-numbers for the keys to identify what key is being pressed, and the ascii is reflected in the interface of the instrument which is solely based on ascii as well. It’s an interface that allows you to monitor what you’re doing with the keys. Highly convenient. We slowly managed to use the keyboard without the interface, but it’s a tedious process of confusion and doubts. Especially when debugging other functionalities at the same time.
The keyboard actions are mainly based on the position of the left hand around the ‘WASD’-keys. The mixer part is enabled by holding the shift key. We tried a lot of different approaches to this, also managing to make regular keys act as modulator keys, and really wanted this distinctly retro approach to interfacing feel natural in the century of touch screen. We’re not the ones to judge this, so we can only hope that you feel the same as us about this.

#### The Philosophy
Nothing is perfect, but some things may still be considered perfecterer than others. Many of us would argue that digital hi-fi is more perfect in the terms of audio quality than an old gramophone record. And objectively many of us would kind of agree. But how these different

Is perfect the most interesting ideal for all purposes?

LoFi


#### Henrik
As part of the project my responsibility has been building the basic looper and developing the functions.

#### Future functions
Double loop length if new loop is closer to double length that to ... should this be included?
