---
layout: post
title: "Telematic performance and communication: tools to fight loneliness towards a future of connection."
date: 2021-09-22 10:00:00 +0200
categories: portal
author: Sofía González
image:
keywords: telematic, performance, communication, connection
excerpt: "With telematic performances on the rise during a global pandemic, we should explore telematic interaction to prevent loneliness and how it applies to performances. "
---

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In the midst of a pandemic, we have suffered more than ever from the emotional response that we understand as loneliness. Spending time sequestered in our houses, not being able to see our loved ones, to hug them, is almost unnatural to social beings as we, humans, are. Hence, when we call these COVID times ‘tough’ or ‘trying times’, I believe we do not refer just to the illness and death, but also to the psychological damage it has caused in most, if not all, of us.

## Tapes from Greece, and the Building of Community through the Telematic Medium
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;It was while reading the article “Tapes from Greece, and the Building of Community through the Telematic Medium” by Jefferson Pitcher that I noticed how the loneliness we have felt during lockdown is nothing new, nothing humans had not experienced before. Throughout said article, Pitcher writes about his skepticism towards telematic music performances and how he grew to appreciate them. In order to help the reader understand his change of heart, he delves into the disconnection we have suffered as a society in the process of moving into the cities and out of the rural areas. He recalls the difference between the social interactions that he experiences in a big city’s supermarket compared to that of a small city’s or a village’s: in the small city, people get to know you eventually, which ensures that you will have acquaintances to share some social interactions with. Meanwhile, in the big city, there are so many people that you become anonymous and isolated. Then, he shares with us readers how his cousin, Beth, committed suicide. He eventually wonders if that event could have been prevented if she had not felt “cut off from the world” enough to leave before the earth took her (Pitcher) and how he hopes that his child never feels that way. He also shares this story about sending recorded tapes to feel closer to his best friend while they were apart, in a time when the internet was still developing. When looking back to these stories and reflecting, Pitcher eventually changed his opinion towards telematic music. He realized the importance of being connected in times and situations where we physically cannot. Therefore, musicians finding a way to make music together even when they are far away from each other, finding a way to communicate, it felt similar to living in a small town. Just people reaching out when they are feeling lonely.

## Telematic connections: sensing, feeling, being in space together
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;On the other hand, in Naomi P. Bennet’s article “Telematic connections: sensing, feeling, being in space together” found in the International Journal of Performance Arts and Digital Media, she delves deeper into the concept of how human connection differs when it is done telematically. She does this through the exploration of two telematic performances she developed. To that end, she first explains the term “virtual touch” that she uses to “describe a visceral experience in which feelings of touch can be elicited through the visual senses, transcending the presence of physical touch” (Bennet, 247). She relates this term to Laura Marks’ cinematic theory of haptic visuality, which defends that “visual stimuli creates a tactile response in the body and ‘the eyes themselves function like organs of touch’” (Bennet, 247). The point of exploring such term and theory is to understand that telematic interaction can never be carried out as one would face-to-face interaction. Instead, she thinks that we need to re-define “what it means to be present with one another” (Bennet, 266) and the conception of ‘space’ as we usually understand it in order to make the most of telematic communication and performances. Next, she proceeds to explain the development of her two telematic performances, both of which deal with themes of telepresence and connecting with people digitally while sharing intimacy and connection. While elaborating on the shows, she stresses how important was to apply the virtual touch in the actors’ performances. It is evident that, despite the lack of physical presence, the people involved made meaningful and genuine connections. This proves that, if done right, telematic communication and performances might be different, but still serve their purpose. She concludes insisting on the importance of exploring the digital medium for connecting since, now more than ever, we crave intimacy, touch and interaction.

## A third party opinion
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Both of the articles I brought up deal with the ‘connecting’ factor in telematic communication and performance. However, while Pitcher reflects on the relevance of reaching out to people by using telematic music performances among other tools, Bennet digs into how telematic connection needs a re-learning of our conception of touch and intimacy and how that also affects telematic performance.
Pitcher’s article was enlightening and incredibly moving, however it can come across as too centered on telematic music performance as a communication method. In other words, he writes about a very humanistic side of music, which in itself does not pose a problem. However, while I do believe that humans use music to communicate our emotions and to connect, I also think that many musicians are attracted to the telematic world to experiment different ways to create music and challenge technology. Additionally, the article presents itself as personal and subjective, which still makes it a good piece but not informative and not very useful from an investigative perspective. Still, it urges us not to forget about the human factor in telematic performance. It is a feat achieved by technology and experimentation but with the final goal of connecting us.
Bennet’s article can also come off as focused on the humanistic theme that applies to communication, however she shows both sides of the coin: she expands on the development of her shows, which were originally a way of investigating the phenomenon of virtual touch, which provides a more experimental mindset. This way, she offers the reader technical information that might be useful for future reference. Aside from that, I believe that the emphasis she makes on shifting our conception on what human touch and connection is raises awareness on an original and essential point if we want to further explore and expand on telematic connection in the future.

## Conclusion
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In short, after experiencing a global pandemic and the isolation that came with it, exploring telematic interaction (be it communication, music creation, theatrical performances etc.) feels more relevant than ever. Pitcher’s article brings attention to our disconnection as a society and the importance of connecting through any means possible. Bennet’s article highlights how telematic and physical interactions are different but still telematic performances and communication are gaining more and more traction during COVID times. Both of them share common concerns but bring different perspectives to the table. Finally, I would like to add that I especially enjoyed reading Pitcher’s piece, since it was relatable enough to make me emotional. On top of that, both of the authors resonated with me in their search for creating and connecting by any means possible. Art is meant to be shared and nowadays we get to do it no matter the distance.


### Bibliography
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pitcher, Jefferson (2009), Online supplement to LMJ 19, MIT Press Journals, URL: http://mitpressjournals.org
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Naomi P. Bennett (2020) Telematic connections: sensing, feeling, being in space together, International Journal of Performance Arts and Digital Media, 16:3, 245-268, DOI: 10.1080/14794713.2020.1827531
